# Project: Build a Data Lake with Spark

__Data Engineer:__ Lysmar Freitas  


## 1. Introduction
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, I was tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

This way, I'll be able to test the database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to me by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare my results with their expected results.  


## 2. Project Description
In this project, you'll build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. To complete the project, I will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. I'll deploy this Spark process on a cluster using AWS.  


## 3. Project Datasets

The project will work with two datasets that reside in S3 on Udacity Nanodegree workspace. Here are the S3 links for each:

- Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
- Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

Log data json path: s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json

### 3.1. Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

- song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
- song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

### 3.2. Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

- log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
- log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

And below is an example of what a single log file, 2018-11-13-events.json, looks like.

{"artist":"Pavement", "auth":"Logged In", "firstName":"Sylvie", "gender", "F", "itemInSession":0, "lastName":"Cruz", "length":99.16036, "level":"free", "location":"Klamath Falls, OR", "method":"PUT", "page":"NextSong", "registration":"1.541078e+12", "sessionId":345, "song":"Mercy:The Laundromat", "status":200, "ts":1541990258796, "userAgent":"Mozilla/5.0(Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4...)", "userId":10}



## 4. Project Development
Below are the steps followed to complete this project.

### 4.1 Create Table Schemas

#### 4.1.1 Design schemas for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and event datasets, it was created a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

##### Fact Table
__songplays -__ records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
- songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

##### Dimension Tables
__users -__ users in the app
- user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

__songs -__ songs in music database
- song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

__artists -__ artists in music database
- artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude

__time -__ timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
- start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


### 4.2 Build ETL Pipeline
Implement the logic in the script _etl.py_ to read data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3.

#### 4.2.1 Define a function to process song_data to create songs and artists tables
This function reads __song_data__ dataset from S3, processes data using __Spark__ and writes them back to S3 in form of __songs_table__ and __artists_table__ parquet files.


#### 4.2.2. Define a function to process log_data to create  users, time and songplays tables
This function reads reads __log_data__ dataset from S3, processes data using __Spark__ and writes them back to S3 in form of __songplays_table__, __users_table__ and __time_table__ parquet files.



#### 4.3 Set AWS credentials and run the script
I set the AWS credentials on __dl.cfg__ file and then run the __elt_py__ script ON terminal.


## 5. Conclusion
The project successfully read song_data and load_data from S3, transforme them to create five different tables, and wrote them to partitioned parquet files in table directories on S3. This will enable Sparkify analytics team to find more detailed insights in what songs their users are listening to.